=====================================================================
         PyPy Leysin Winter Sprint (20-28th February 2015)
=====================================================================

The next PyPy sprint will be in Leysin, Switzerland, for the tenth time.
This is a fully public sprint: newcomers and topics other than those
proposed below are welcome.

------------------------------
Goals and topics of the sprint
------------------------------

The details depend on who is here and ready to work.  We might touch
topics such as:

* cleaning up the optimization step in the JIT, change the register
  allocation done by the JIT's backend, or improvements to the
  warm-up time

* STM (Software Transaction Memory), notably: try to come up with
  benchmarks, and measure them carefully in order to test and improve
  the conflict reporting tools, and more generally to figure out how
  practical it is in large projects to avoid conflicts

* vmprof - a statistical profiler for CPython and PyPy work, including
  making it more user friendly.

* Py3k (Python 3.x support), NumPyPy (the numpy module)

* And as usual, the main side goal is to have fun in winter sports :-)
  We can take a day off for ski.

-----------
Exact times
-----------

For a change, and as an attempt to simplify things, I specified the
dates as 20-28 Februrary 2015, where 20 and 28 are travel days.  We will
work full days between the 21 and the 27.  You are of course allowed to
show up for a part of that time only, too.

-----------------------
Location & Accomodation
-----------------------

Leysin, Switzerland, "same place as before".  Let me refresh your
memory: both the sprint venue and the lodging will be in a very spacious
pair of chalets built specifically for bed & breakfast:
http://www.ermina.ch/.  The place has a good ADSL Internet connexion
with wireless installed.  You can of course arrange your own lodging
anywhere (as long as you are in Leysin, you cannot be more than a 15
minutes walk away from the sprint venue), but I definitely recommend
lodging there too -- you won't find a better view anywhere else (though
you probably won't get much worse ones easily, either :-)

Please *confirm* that you are coming so that we can adjust the
reservations as appropriate.  In the past, the rates were around 60 CHF a
night all included in 2-person rooms, with breakfast.  Now, the rooms
available are either single-person (or couple), or rooms for 3 persons.
The latter choice is recommended and should be under 60 CHF per person.

Please register by Mercurial::

  https://bitbucket.org/pypy/extradoc/
  https://bitbucket.org/pypy/extradoc/raw/extradoc/sprintinfo/leysin-winter-2015

or on the pypy-dev mailing list if you do not yet have check-in rights:

  http://mail.python.org/mailman/listinfo/pypy-dev

You need a Swiss-to-(insert country here) power adapter.  There will be
some Swiss-to-EU adapters around, and at least one EU-format power strip.
