Py3k status update #3
---------------------

This is the third status update about my work on the `py3k branch`_, which I
can work on thanks to all of the people who donated_ to the `py3k proposal`_.

A lot of work has been done during the last month: as usual, the list of
changes is too big to be reported in a detalied way, so this is just a summary
of what happened.

One of the most active areas was killing old and deprecated features. In
particular, we killed support for the ``__cmp__`` special method and its
counsins, the ``cmp`` builtin function and keyword argument for
``list.sort()`` and ``sorted()``.  Killing is easy, but then you have to fix
all the places which breaks because of this, including all the types which
relied on ``__cmp__`` to be comparable,, fixing all the tests which tried to
order objects which are no longer ordeable now, or implementing new behavior
like forbidding calling ``hash()`` on objects which implement ``__eq__`` but
not ``__hash__``.

Among the other features, we killed lots of now-gone functions in the
``operator`` module, the builtins ``apply()``, ``reduce()`` and ``buffer``,
and the ``os.*`` functions to deal with temporary files, which has been
deprecated in favour of the new ``tempfile`` module.

The other topic which can't miss in a py3k status update is, as usual,
string-vs-unicode. At this round, we fixed bugs in string formatting (in
particular to teach ``format()`` to always use unicode strings) and various
corner cases about when calling the (possibly overridden) ``__str__`` method
on subclasses of ``str``. Believe me, you don't want to know the precise rules
:-).

Other features which we worked on and fixed tests include, but are not limited
to, ``marshal``, ``hashlib``, ``zipimport``, ``_socket`` and ``itertools``,
plus the habitual endless lists of tests which fail for shallow reasons such
as the syntactic differences, ``int`` vs ``long``, ``range()`` vs
``list(range())`` etc. As a result, the number of failing tests dropped_ from
650 to 235: we are beginning to see the light at the end of the tunnel :-)

Benjamin finished implementing Python 3 syntax. Most of it was small cleanups
and tweaks to be compatible with CPython such as making ``True`` and ``False``
keywords and preventing ``. . .`` from being parsed as ``Ellipsis``. Larger
syntax additions included keyword only arguments and function annotations.

Finally, we did some RPython fixes, so that it is possible again to translate
PyPy in the py3k branch. However, the resuling binary is a strange beast which
mixes python 2 and python 3 semantics, so it is unusable for anything but
`showing friends how cool it's that`_.

.. image:: py3k-activity-march.png

I would like to underline that I was not alone in doing all this work. In
particular, a lot of people joined the PyPy sprint at Pycon and worked on the
branch, as you can clearly see in this activity graph. I would like to thank
all who helped!

cheers,
Antonio and Benjamin

.. _donated: http://morepypy.blogspot.com/2012/01/py3k-and-numpy-first-stage-thanks-to.html
.. _`py3k proposal`: http://pypy.org/py3donate.html
.. _`py3k branch`: https://bitbucket.org/pypy/pypy/src/py3k
.. _`showing friends how cool it's that`: http://paste.pocoo.org/show/577006/
.. _dropped: http://buildbot.pypy.org/summary?category=linux32&branch=py3k&recentrev=53956:3c8ac35c653a
