people present:
    - Armin
    - Carl Friedrich
    - Laura
    - Håkan
    - Lukas
    - Anders
    - Romain
    - Dario


tasks:
- fix the projector
- release 1.5
    - fix the import problem (Armin, Romain)
    - fix the jit tests (Håkan, Armin around
    - do we have 2.7 or 2.7.1? rename the directory
    - merge jit-lsprof (Carl Friedrich, Dario)
    - merge exarkun's branches, after review (Armin, Romain)
    - merge jitypes2?
    - documentation (Laura, Carl Friedrich)

- branches to be integrated/finished afterwards
    - 32-on-64
    - lukas' branches: list-strategies/dict-strategies
    - new-dict-proxy (Lukas)
    - out-of-line guards
    - refactor-not-in-translator
    - håkan's branches

- other tasks
    - continue tracing after invalid loops
    - look into cython
    - investigate Open End software on top of PyPy (Lukas, Anders)

- presentations/discussions
    - Lukas' presentation on memory improvements (Tuesday)
    - codespeak migration
