People present
---------------

Carl Friedrich
Anto
Remi
Marko
Romain
Richard
Richard2
Armin
Edd
Maciej
Manuel
Rami

People not present
-------------------

Olmo
Tom
Laurie
Lukas

Tasks
-----

* fix the issue with the os.xyz attributes not showing up depending on
  which host we use during translation.
  Maybe revive branch 'missing-os-functions'.

* cffi 1.0: think about how to separate compilation from execution of
  the script (e.g. a separate foo.c file, and "python -m cffi foo.c")

* cffi: think about and collect which C-extensions we would like to bring to cffi

* PYPYLOG output: they need to be disentangled when the process uses
  threads or greenlets, probably by adding a thread-or-greenlet number
  prefix (see branch stmgc-c4 where we already add a thread num prefix)

* general STM things (Remi, Armin) ONE BUG LESS

* general Numpy things TWO BUGS LESS, ONE BUG MORE

* track raw array out of bounds in lldebug builds

* PyOpenCL (Marko) HARDER THAN WE THOUGHT, BUT PROGRESS

* fix some of the RPython nits that Edd found SOME PROGRESS

* continue less-stringly-ops and other RPython cleanups

* better error messages for union errors TO BE MERGED

* better error messages for moving attributes (Edd, Ronan)

* programming (all)

* JIT for xlispx (Richard, Carl Friedrich) WE HAVE A JIT (NOT A GOOD ONE THOUGH)

* explore Laurie's crazy scheme of persisting loop entry counts EXPERIMENTING

* progress on refactoring resume data (Maciek, Anto)

* progress on the documentation branch (Manuel, Rami) NICER GETTING STARTED/INTRODUCTION

* Python 3 benchmarks (Richard2) PULL REQUEST SENT

* meditate on benchmarking infrastructure (Richard2, Maciej around) 

* start branch for Python 3.3

* review the pypy-pyarray branch

* general wizardry (Carl Friedrich; Armin)

* try going back to the empty strategy (Lukas)

* look at this: https://bitbucket.org/pypy/pypy/pull-request/176/fixed-support-for-re-stdlib-274/diff

Discussions planned
--------------------

* demo session Tuesday DONE
* scientific computing roadmap DONE
* STM dissemination round
* JIT optimizer mess DONE
* roadmap planning
* do we want pip installed on downloadable pypys? TODAY after lunch
* generalize jitviewer to other languages

* LuaJIT discussion DONE (Tom, Armin, Maciek, Carl Friedrich, Laurie)
