people present:
    Anto
    Carl Friedrich
    Ronny
    Armin
    Håkan
    Lukas

coming later?:
    Sven

not there today:
    David

topics:

- add spilling and location support IN PROGRESS
- ARM int trace operations SOME PROGRESS
- hg conversion WE HAVE AN EVEN DIFFERENT PLAN (Anto, Ronny)
- refine heap analysis GETTING BETTER (Carl Friedrich, Lukas)
- (Re)write _bisect module DONE
- buildbot improvements, locks, email on failing tests
- run pypy-c-nojit in the benchmarks
- make it possible to run benchmark on branches
- understand problems of mapdict (Carl Friedrich, Armin)
- rewrite ctypes to use _ffi
- fix the remaining bugs on the jit-unroll-loops branch (Armin, Håkan)
- have an implementation of Python longs with C long longs
- work in Pyrolog (Sven, Carl Friedrich around)

scheduled discussions:

- hg migration planning
- understand håkan's branch
- JIT introduction (still today after lunch)
