post-EU PyPy organisation discussion
----------------------------------------

Attendants: 

Samuele Pedroni, Anders Chrigstr√∂m, Christian Tismer, Anders
Sigfridsson, Michael Hudson, Antonio Cuni, Richard Emslie, 
Stephan Diel, Alexander Schremmer, Georg Brandl, 
Maciej Fijalkowski, Guido Wesdorp, Carl Friedrich Bolz, 
Armin Rigo, Holger Krekel, Lene Wagner 

*disclaimer*: Below are keypoint results of the sprint discussion 
about the organisation of the open-source PyPy project after
the EU funding period.  


- PyPy's future as an open-source project should be shaped
  by the community and the people contributing and involved with it

- development and communication continues as before: 
  - pypy-dev
  - IRC 
  - sprints (fewer, though, likely) 
  - #pypy-sync (maybe on a fixed date like 1st thursday each month)
  - meetings of interested people involved with a particular topic
  - in case of unresolved conflicts: caretakers 

- make http://pypy.org the new main entry point to
  pypy, and make the website a bit more independent of 
  {dist,trunk,release}/pypy/doc structure.  That might
  also make sense for the 1.0 release already. 

- have a "caretakers" group of people for the next year of 
  PyPy development (so until 1st april 2008 - 1st april
  is a good day for project news, anyway),

- the name is open for discussion

  "care for the next year of PyPy development" means: 
  - keeping conceptual integrity of the code base and project
  - settling roadmaps / dev targets / new releases 
  - organising communication within the community 
    (including regulating commit rights/structure) 
  - talking to / negotiating with external parties
    (including the EU partner organisations) 

  Regarding the caretaker people/group: 
    - group may get extended by the group if everybody agrees
    - agree to working with each other
	- everbody is free to leave
    - members should employ an overall project perspective 
    - confirmation from community (sprint, pypy-sync) 
    - may include non-technical persons on a regular basis
    - consensus decisions, or majority decisions after a break
	- non-attending people may re-raise a topic/decision
      if they disagree with the decision of the attending people

  infrastructure: 
  - mailing list
  - protected subversion area for mail drafts, internal issues

  suggested candidates: 
  samuele, cf, armin, hpk, michael 
  (bea, lene integrated and others 
   consulting/joining on case-by-case basis)

- make statements to the community about future plans soon,
  particulary noticing that the development pace will slowdown. 

- start determining how to go about external funding opportunities



Background notes 
----------------------

- full-time codespeak.net maintenance is going to end 1st April, 
  Martin (merlinux) may care a bit after that. 
  There will be some (shared?) physical hosting costs and hopefully multiple
  volunteers helping out with sys maintenance/care.  Martin would
  probably also be happy to continue somewhat professionally 
  for a fee to maintain the server. 
  background: merlinux as a company will do some sort of break/sabbatical
  starting around april-june, lasting until end of the year, 
  but nevertheless considers future project opportunities. 

- major focus of march-may will still be EU related goals and deadlines 

- next sprint likely not before EuroPython

