pypy-sync 18th May 2006, 17:30 - 18:00 (UTC+2)
=====================================================

attendants: michael (mod and minutes), anto (beforehand), samuele,
            carl, eric, arre, armin, anders, holger, nik

* activity reports: everybody posted, see log below. 

* oopsla paper and europython submissions

  We talked about the requirements for a paper at the Dynamic Language
  Symposium at OOPSLA.  There was discussion about whether we could
  (probably) or should (probably not) reuse material from our WP05 reports.
  It was agreed that Samuele and Armin would spend a little time working on
  an outline before Samuele goes on holiday on Monday.  This is in
  <http://codespeak.net/pypy/extradoc/talk/dls2006/outline.txt> so far.

  The deadline is June 1.

  We also talked about how many talks we should submit to EuroPython
  this year.  I've summarized the decisions in
  <http://codespeak.net/pypy/extradoc/talk/ep2006/planning.txt>.

* state of the world

  We didn't really get to this in any meaningful way.  Try again next week?

* any other business?

  Samuele noted that translation with --new-stackless is very, very slow.
  Michael responded that he was running a version with profiling using
  lsprof to see if he could find any obvious stupidities.  This translation
  has still not finished, nearly 24 hours later, so it must be breaking all
  known records for longest translation...

IRC logs 
-------------

::

    [16:22] <antocuni> uhm... I've to go out at 17:30
    [16:22] <antocuni> here is my report:
    [16:22] <antocuni> LAST: completed ootypesystem string; broken the translation few times :-)
    [16:22] <antocuni> NEXT: string support in gencli; some university stuff
    [16:22] <antocuni> BLOCKERS: None
    [16:22] <antocuni> see you later
    [16:23] antocuni (n=chatzill@217.201.198.80) left irc: "Chatzilla 0.9.72 [Firefox 1.5/2005120619]"
    [16:27] hpk (n=hpk@codespeak.net) joined #pypy-sync.
    [16:29] nikh (n=nikh@102-187.1-85.cust.bluewin.ch) joined #pypy-sync.
    [16:30] ericvrp (n=ericvrp@ericvrp.demon.nl) joined #pypy-sync.
    [16:31] <mwh> hello everyone
    [16:31] <hpk> hi all
    [16:31] <cfbolz> hi!
    [16:31] <janb_> hi!
    [16:31] <nikh> howdy
    [16:32] arigo (n=arigo@c-1f8b70d5.022-54-67626719.cust.bredbandsbolaget.se) joined #pypy-sync.
    [16:32] <mwh> so, activity reports from everyone please
    [16:32] Nick change: mwh -> not-stakkars
    [16:32] <aleale> PREV: OWL reasoner, recreation with my family
    [16:32] <not-stakkars> DONE: coached Stephan on app-level Stackless, helped Eric with
    [16:32] <not-stakkars> the pickling support, analyzed many flow-graphs
    [16:32] <not-stakkars> NEXT: support for costate for app-level, more coaching, implement
    [16:32] <not-stakkars> a few demo picklers, investigate more on feasibility of the
    [16:32] <not-stakkars> pickling design doc, prepare for Iceland sprint
    [16:32] <not-stakkars> BLOCK: I cannot estimate what will come out of it. I'm not
    [16:32] <not-stakkars> sure if I can find a way to avoid pickling of many records.
    [16:32] <aleale> NEXT: More OWL
    [16:32] Nick change: not-stakkars -> mwh
    [16:32] <aleale> block : -
    [16:33] <cfbolz> LAST: uni stuff mostly, some small things
    [16:33] <cfbolz> NEXT: __del__ support??
    [16:33] <cfbolz> BLOCKERS: time constraints
    [16:33] <mwh> LAST: this and that, weakrefs, stackless
    [16:33] <mwh> NEXT: not sure, some performance measurements
    [16:33] <mwh> BLOCKERS: hard to keep up!
    [16:33] <hpk> LAST: pypy duesseldorf and some other pypy orga + plannings, new pypy build host setup, non-pypy
    [16:33] <hpk> NEXT: make pypy build host available, SoC/EU models, non-pypy
    [16:33] <hpk> BLOCKERS: -
    [16:33] <arigo> LAST: integrate stackless and GC
    [16:33] <arigo> NEXT: oopsla paper, thread cloning
    [16:33] <arigo> BLOCKERS: -
    [16:33] <nikh> LAST: non-pypy
    [16:33] <nikh> NEXT: non-pypy
    [16:33] <nikh> BLOCKERS: none, but i'm very deep in university stuff
    [16:34] <mwh> pedronis? arre?
    [16:34] <pedronis> LAST: rctypes primitive types with arre, gc, stackless stuff with Armin, bug fixing
    [16:34] <pedronis> NEXT: vacation, no internet as least until thurs
    [16:34] <pedronis> BLOCKERS: -
    [16:34] <mwh> ericvrp?
    [16:34] <ericvrp> on moment
    [16:34] <arre> PREV: rctypes
    [16:34] <arre> NEXT: Mostly vacation
    [16:34] <arre> BLOCKERS: -
    [16:34] <ericvrp> LAST: slow progress with pickling + dusting of genllvm + little genjs documentation
    [16:34] <ericvrp> NEXT: more pickling and some distractions
    [16:34] <ericvrp> BLOCKERS: don't know
    [16:35] <mwh> so the first topic is the oopsla paper
    [16:35] <mwh> (with an additional subtopic of "europython papers")
    [16:36] <mwh> the deadline is june 1
    [16:36] <mwh> arigo, pedronis: i think you talked a bit about this yesterday?
    [16:38] Action: mwh bounces
    [16:38] <arigo> samuele?  want to say a word about it?
    [16:38] <hpk> i am curious if you considered a research or an experience paper
    [16:38] <hpk> or both :)
    [16:39] <pedronis> well, I think the idea is to write an overview paper, describing how basic techniques: type inference/ abstract interpreation
    [16:39] <hpk> based on the d05 papers?
    [16:40] <hpk> i mean the work package 5 papers
    [16:40] <pedronis> shortly and then seeing how this are repeatedly used through the tool chain and to impose types on our singled langague
    [16:40] <pedronis> and what can we achieve with this
    [16:40] <cfbolz> hpk: much more overviewish, I think
    [16:41] <pedronis> s/singled .../single not statically typed language
    [16:41] <mwh> do we know e.g. how long papers are expected to be?
    [16:41] <hpk> mwh: max 12 pages in PDF
    [16:41] <hpk> and they require the "ACM format"
    [16:42] <mwh> right
    [16:42] <mwh> that's just a style file with the latex, i don't think that's too big a deal
    [16:42] <mwh> ... cfbolz ? :)
    [16:42] <cfbolz> :-)
    [16:42] <cfbolz> we will see :-)
    [16:43] <pedronis> well, with 12 pages, is hard not to be overviewish
    [16:43] <hpk> right
    [16:43] <pedronis> and unless we focused on a single thing
    [16:43] <pedronis> and even then
    [16:43] <hpk> we do not have the problem that we couldn't reuse stuff from existing reports though
    [16:43] <hpk> because none of them was published in their sense, or is that not correct?
    [16:43] <pedronis> I think it will read differently
    [16:44] <pedronis> but yes copying long chunks is not a good idea
    [16:44] <hpk> yip
    [16:44] <mwh> i think that's correct, but possibly not that relevant
    [16:44] <pedronis> also I'm not sure we can
    [16:44] <pedronis> under the 12 pages constraint
    [16:44] <pedronis> we really need to write a fresh text
    [16:45] <pedronis> we cannot cram the wp05 report in it
    [16:45] <pedronis> which is more than 20 pages
    [16:45] <mwh> so, next question: who writes it
    [16:45] <mwh> pedronis is on holiday next week
    [16:46] <mwh> so arigo and ... ?
    [16:46] <hpk> pedronis: sure, i understood that point (although i am not as sure as you that we cannot use anything of what we already have, including graphics etc.)
    [16:46] <pedronis> I can possibly help a bit after next thursday
    [16:46] <mwh> ok
    [16:46] <pedronis> or before monday
    [16:46] <mwh> would be nice to have the bones of a report before then
    [16:46] <mwh> oh
    [16:47] <mwh> maybe you and arigo could come up with an outline soon-ish?
    [16:47] <pedronis> arigo: we may try to write an outline tomorrow
    [16:47] Action: hpk thinks he can proof-read and possibly help end next week/early the following
    [16:48] <arigo> ok for me
    [16:48] <hpk> but again, research or experience paper?
    [16:48] <hpk> they seem to make this distinction
    [16:48] <cfbolz> sounds more like research to me
    [16:48] <pedronis> I think experience papers are more about using a language or some features
    [16:49] <mwh> yes research i think
    [16:49] <hpk> ok
    [16:49] <mwh> if we can hurry on
    [16:49] <mwh> how many talks do we want to submit to europython?
    [16:50] <mwh> hpk: is bea going to do a talk in the agility track?
    [16:50] <hpk> mwh: quite likely, yes, i meet her in 10 minutes
    [16:50] <mwh> hpk: coool
    [16:50] <mwh> do we think there's still a market for an introductory talk?
    [16:50] <mwh> i think there probably is
    [16:51] <hpk> mwh: your accu talk is a 80% base talk for that, i'd think
    [16:51] <mwh> it's fairly long though
    [16:51] <mwh> but i guess, do we want to do something else as well?
    [16:52] <hpk> one on the ext-compiler?
    [16:52] <cfbolz> now comes the potentially interesting talk :-)
    [16:52] <mwh> hpk: that might be good, yes
    [16:53] <hpk> what about the pypy archsession from Pycon?
    [16:53] <arigo> we should have something for the language track
    [16:54] <hpk> the intersection between pycon and EP is not that large, so doing the arch-session + introductory talk (+ maybe ext-compiler) would make sense IMO, but what do you all think?
    [16:54] <arigo> hpk: maybe i'm getting skeptical about the usefulness of that talk
    [16:54] <ericvrp> I was thinking of giving a pypy-js/genjs talk but there has been to little progress/things to show to make it worth while
    [16:54] <hpk> arigo: it did receive quite positive feedback as far as i heard it, do you know/feel differently?
    [16:55] <arigo> hpk: no, good then
    [16:55] <arigo> I was thinking that it should soon be time to present a language talk
    [16:55] <arigo> about the new language-visible features we can have in PyPy
    [16:56] <hpk> right
    [16:56] <hpk> a "pypy features" talk would be well received, i'd guess
    [16:56] <cfbolz> and maybe get people away from the speed thing
    [16:56] <mwh> yes, i think so too
    [16:57] <mwh> four pypy related talks might be a bit much though :)
    [16:57] <arigo> yes, I'm worrying a bit that pypy is seen mostly as a large complicated architecture
    [16:57] <pedronis> ah ah. people will never get away from the speed thing
    [16:57] <hpk> arigo: you don't worry that it actually _is_ a complicated arch, right? :)
    [16:57] <arigo> never :-)
    [16:57] <pedronis> is quite simple in some sense
    [16:58] <hpk> some swiss sense
    [16:58] <cfbolz> :-)
    [16:58] <hpk> anyway, so let's agree on how to proceed there maybe next week?
    [16:58] <mwh> so, um, we're running out of time
    [16:58] <arigo> well, maybe this could go together with the ext-compiler
    [16:59] <hpk> arigo: yes, pypy features should have 10 minutes about the ext-compiler because that's probably the most real thing
    [16:59] <mwh> pypy agility + pypy intro + pypy features
    [16:59] <mwh> sounds like a plan for now
    [16:59] <arigo> "agility" or "architecture" ?
    [16:59] <hpk> + maybe pypy arch
    [16:59] <hpk> pypy bea/agility
    [16:59] <hpk> is what mwh meant
    [16:59] <arigo> ok
    [16:59] <mwh> pypy bea then :)
    [16:59] <arigo> :-)
    [17:00] <mwh> i think doing the state of the pypy universe in 1 minute is a bit of a stretch
    [17:00] <cfbolz> "confusing"
    [17:00] <mwh> any other business?
    [17:00] <hpk> ericvrp: but i think a pypy/js focused talk would also make some sense - in the web track :)
    [17:00] <pedronis> new-stackless translation is veeeeeery slow
    [17:00] <mwh> i'm profiling now
    [17:01] <arigo> ericvrp: indeed, maybe with fijal even?
    [17:01] <ericvrp> hpk, the problem is I can not point people to some concrete examples, so it's a bit vague IMO
    [17:01] <pedronis> we need to kill the defaults assumption in lltype, we may gain some speed in the gcs
    [17:01] <hpk> ericvrp: maybe, but you do have code that runs in a browser
    [17:02] <ericvrp> well yes, how many minutes should such a talk be ?
    [17:02] <mwh> well, 30 minutes is the shortest you can do :)
    [17:03] <mwh> there are always lightning talks if you don't want to commit to any results :)
    [17:03] <ericvrp> I have the feeling that would be better. Real work on genjs will start after europython
    [17:04] <mwh> ok
    [17:04] <mwh> so unless there's anything else, i'd like to close the meeting
