#pypy-sync 29th May 2006, 5pm (UTC+2) 
=====================================================

attendants: michael (mod and minutes), anto (beforehand), samuele,
            carl, eric, arre, armin, anders, holger, nik

: everybody posted, see log below. 

activity reports
-----------------

everybody posted, see log below. 

Duesseldorf sprint planning
------------------------------

- thursday evening: a beer meeting point is 8pm "hotel an der uni"
- friday morning: meeting point and time will be posted by Armin 
  holger will also try to get information. 
- monday is likely the breakday 
- armin may only arrive on the 4th 

- release day is set as the 7th, Wednesday 

DLS paper 
----------------

The work on this is well in progress, says Armin.  But he
needs two days of work with Samuele on some specific sections. 
Michael offers to review wednesday afternoon. 

Also, some LateX fighting is foreseen, help would 
be appreciated!  

EP pre and post sprint
-------------------------------

We decided to go for the full 6th-9th (both including) as the
post-EP sprint time.  Sprint is scheduled in Geneva.
Announcement pending. 

pre-EP sprint: it is not clear yet who could come and focus on
the core sprint.  Carl, Michael and possibly Holger will not
be able to attend.  Niklaus, Christian, Armin, Anders and Arre
could attend. 

We'll decide in DDorf about the pre-EP sprint
and its location (Geneva or Leysin). 

Misc topics
-------------

Michael and holger will care tomorrow for co-ordinating/doing
the pypy talk EuroPython 2006 submissions.  

Christian reported that Gerald stopped working for tismerysoft
by end of March on and that Eric will stop by end of June. 
 
IRC logs 
-------------

::

    May 29 16:50:43 -->	You are now talking on #pypy-sync
    May 29 16:50:43 ---	Topic for #pypy-sync is PyPy - the flexible snake. This channel is used for pair programming and sync meetings.
    May 29 16:50:43 ---	Topic for #pypy-sync set by xorAxAx at Sun Apr 16 21:44:23
    May 29 17:01:09 <stakkars>	10:01
    May 29 17:01:14 <hpk>	hum, a few people missing still that's we'd like to have here
    May 29 17:01:15 <stakkars>	17:01
    May 29 17:01:15 <hpk>	hi christian 
    May 29 17:01:21 <stakkars>	hi Holgi
    May 29 17:02:08 <arre>	Hi!
    May 29 17:02:12 <stakkars>	hi
    May 29 17:02:16 <hpk>	mwh: are you here? 
    May 29 17:02:21 <stakkars>	no need to wait for Eric or Samuele, btw
    May 29 17:02:33 <mwh>	ah right, i am here
    May 29 17:02:33 -->	nikh (n=nikh@11.234.62.81.cust.bluewin.ch) has joined #pypy-sync
    May 29 17:03:39 <hpk>	yip, i had hoped that armin comes
    May 29 17:04:00 <stakkars>	Stephan seems to be busy in the afternoon
    May 29 17:04:10 <hpk>	anyway, let's start, here is the topic list: 
    May 29 17:04:24 <hpk>	* activity reports
    May 29 17:04:24 <hpk>	* duesseldorf sprint planning
    May 29 17:04:24 <hpk>	* DLS paper status
    May 29 17:04:24 <hpk>	* pre-EP sprint
    May 29 17:04:44 <stakkars>	ok, I'll start pasting
    May 29 17:04:51 <hpk>	go ahead
    May 29 17:04:55 <stakkars>	DONE: Need For Speed sprint: worked on an RPython version of decimal.py (not finished due to problems with the way it is written and prebuilt classes)
    May 29 17:05:04 <stakkars>	NEXT: supporting Stackless and pickling work, still seaching for "the" way to handle threads, need to sync with Samuele
    May 29 17:05:10 <stakkars>	BLOCK: hop.inputconst(Ptr(PyObject), nullptr(PyObject))
    May 29 17:05:21 <hpk>	LAST: sprint issues, june technical project assessment, SoC issues
    May 29 17:05:21 <hpk>	NEXT: DDorf sprint, HHU admin meeting, 0.9 works
    May 29 17:05:21 <hpk>	BLOCKERS: too much
    May 29 17:05:29 <nikh>	LAST: university stuff
    May 29 17:05:29 <nikh>	NEXT: university stuff, a bit of sprinting
    May 29 17:05:29 <nikh>	BLOCKERS: none
    May 29 17:05:31 ---	You are now known as ericvrp
    May 29 17:05:35 <aleale>	PREV: OWLreasoner
    May 29 17:05:35 <aleale>	PREV: OWLreasoner
    May 29 17:05:35 <aleale>	NEXT: more OWLreasoner and sprint
    May 29 17:05:35 <aleale>	blocker: -
    May 29 17:05:37 <ericvrp>	LAST: pickling + put profile based optimization in benchmark cronjob
    May 29 17:05:37 <ericvrp>	+ speedup pypy-llvm
    May 29 17:05:37 <ericvrp>	NEXT: pickling
    May 29 17:05:37 <ericvrp>	BLOCKERS: -
    May 29 17:05:40 ---	You are now known as hpk
    May 29 17:05:43 <arre>	PREV: Vacation
    May 29 17:05:44 <arre>	NEXT: Some Unicode work, Duesseldorf
    May 29 17:05:44 <arre>	BLOCKERS: -
    May 29 17:06:18 <mwh>	LAST: this and that, some gc stuff
    May 29 17:06:19 <mwh>	NEXT: dls paper, travel, sprint
    May 29 17:06:19 <mwh>	BLOCKERS: keeping up
    May 29 17:06:40 <hpk>	ok then on to DDorf sprint planning 
    May 29 17:06:55 <hpk>	stakkars: i guess it makes most sense to try to remove your blocker on #pypy later 
    May 29 17:07:13 <hpk>	DDorf: most of us already arrive on 1st 
    May 29 17:07:20 <hpk>	do we have a meeting point/time somewhere? 
    May 29 17:07:23 <stakkars>	if you know what it means then you know that it is None :-)
    May 29 17:08:14 <mwh>	i arrive pretty late on the 1st
    May 29 17:08:22 <hpk>	ah ok
    May 29 17:08:22 <mwh>	i don't actually know where we are sprinting
    May 29 17:08:23 <aleale>	I will first arrive at 23
    May 29 17:08:46 <stakkars>	I have no clue when I arrive. Will take some train
    May 29 17:08:50 <mwh>	i guess we could meet somewhere near armin's and my office
    May 29 17:08:56 <mwh>	stakkars: which day, at least?
    May 29 17:09:02 <hpk>	or at the "hotel an der uni" where most everybody stays apparently 
    May 29 17:09:11 <stakkars>	as I said in people.txt, June 1st.
    May 29 17:09:16 <mwh>	stakkars: ok
    May 29 17:09:28 <hpk>	ok, i guess i might drop by the hotel at 8 pm or so, more on the mobile phone
    May 29 17:09:42 <stakkars>	then we should meet there
    May 29 17:09:50 -->	arigo (n=arigo@c-1f8b70d5.022-54-67626719.cust.bredbandsbolaget.se) has joined #pypy-sync
    May 29 17:09:55 <hpk>	arigo: hi armin!
    May 29 17:10:02 <stakkars>	welcome!
    May 29 17:10:05 <arigo>	sorry
    May 29 17:10:19 <hpk>	we just said that some of us weill meet already on june 1st 8pm "hotel an der uni" 
    May 29 17:10:33 <hpk>	another question was: where do we meet friday morning 
    May 29 17:10:49 <arigo>	at the CS department, I expect
    May 29 17:10:59 <hpk>	it would be good if someone local could post some precise enough information
    May 29 17:11:11 <arigo>	indeed
    May 29 17:11:12 <hpk>	like street name and number or so 
    May 29 17:11:15 <mwh>	prepare to get lost :)
    May 29 17:11:20 <arigo>	yes :-)
    May 29 17:11:20 <mwh>	the hhu campus is a maze
    May 29 17:11:37 <hpk>	great, i'll be there on 1st already to meet with lene and HHU admins at 2pm, btw 
    May 29 17:12:35 <hpk>	do we go for a breakday on monday? 
    May 29 17:13:10 <stakkars>	well, if DDorf has something worthy to break for :-)
    May 29 17:13:17 <hpk>	and a 0.9 release on wednesday? 
    May 29 17:13:39 <hpk>	i'd not like to do it on the last day (which seems to become the 8th/thursday where everybody is still there)
    May 29 17:13:48 <mwh>	hpk: makes sense
    May 29 17:13:51 <arigo>	just to mention it, I'm still unsure if I arrive the 1st or only the 4th
    May 29 17:14:03 <aleale>	Monday is a public holiday ?
    May 29 17:14:14 <hpk>	aleale: in germany yes, don't know about others 
    May 29 17:14:15 <mwh>	(i'm trying to find a map on the hhu website, i know one is there somewhere...)
    May 29 17:14:37 <mwh>	arigo: when will you be sure?
    May 29 17:14:49 <mwh>	i have sufficient keys to get in at any time
    May 29 17:15:01 <hpk>	arigo: good to know, then 5th as a breakday would not be so great
    May 29 17:15:20 <arigo>	hpk: I thought about it, and no other day looks very great anyway, so never mind
    May 29 17:15:46 <hpk>	ok, it's going to be a busy sprint, i think
    May 29 17:15:55 <arigo>	also, Carl is not around?  he's the only one that knows about the sprint venue AFAIK
    May 29 17:16:05 <hpk>	arigo: i'll ask him when i see him 
    May 29 17:16:23 <mwh>	arigo: i guess michael would know if we get desparate
    May 29 17:16:26 <hpk>	he is very likely out a few days due to personal issues, unfortunately 
    May 29 17:16:58 <arigo>	ok, then I'll post information about reaching the CS department, at least
    May 29 17:17:17 <hpk>	arigo: ok, i'll also mail leuschel in a second (need to confirm the 1st june date anyway)
    May 29 17:17:27 <hpk>	he probably has a good pointer 
    May 29 17:17:39 <hpk>	i'll CC you so you can repost/enrich and send to pypy-sprint 
    May 29 17:17:42 <mwh>	i expect so
    May 29 17:17:47 <stakkars>	and hopefully no weak ref
    May 29 17:17:51 <hpk>	next topic: DLS paper 
    May 29 17:18:01 <hpk>	what is the status? 
    May 29 17:18:23 <hpk>	(DLS = dynamic language symposium, deadline 30 or 31st may)
    May 29 17:18:25 <mwh>	it seems to be about 50% done?
    May 29 17:18:31 <mwh>	deadline is june 1
    May 29 17:18:35 <hpk>	including? 
    May 29 17:18:40 <arigo>	I think the meat of the text is done
    May 29 17:18:46 <mwh>	http://www.dcl.hpi.uni-potsdam.de/dls2006/openconf.php
    May 29 17:19:02 <mwh>	hpk: don't know, but as everyone is traveling on the 1st...
    May 29 17:19:14 <hpk>	except armin maybe :) 
    May 29 17:19:22 <hpk>	31st becomes the actual deadline indeed
    May 29 17:19:43 <mwh>	makes some sense
    May 29 17:19:46 <hpk>	this wednesday, uff
    May 29 17:20:03 <mwh>	i will try to read through the paper tomorrow
    May 29 17:20:19 <mwh>	then we can spend wednesday fighting with latex :/
    May 29 17:20:20 <arigo>	I definitely plan to work on it with Samuele for the whole next two days
    May 29 17:20:25 <mwh>	oh right
    May 29 17:20:40 <arigo>	hum, that includes the fighting with latex day, hopefully
    May 29 17:21:15 *	stakkars needs to add a tiny topic to the very, just telling about personnell changes in tismerysoft
    May 29 17:21:22 <stakkars>	very end
    May 29 17:21:43 <mwh>	so the DLS paper status is "in progress"
    May 29 17:21:54 <hpk>	arigo: ok, please scream if you need help for reviewing or even writing
    May 29 17:21:54 <arigo>	actively so, yes
    May 29 17:22:14 <hpk>	the more precise the scream the better :) 
    May 29 17:22:27 <stakkars>	arigo: if it helps, I can make up some time on Wednesday
    May 29 17:22:30 <arigo>	what is left are the parts that only Samuele can really do right
    May 29 17:22:37 <hpk>	i see
    May 29 17:22:44 <arigo>	the references, related work etc.
    May 29 17:23:04 <hpk>	arigo: well, thanks a lot for taking up on this, btw
    May 29 17:23:47 <hpk>	one thing: i saw that hardly anyone assigned 0.9 issues to himself, it would really be helpful if we could distribute the efforts, also before the sprint 
    May 29 17:24:27 <stakkars>	how about going through the list on Thursday evning, together?
    May 29 17:24:46 <hpk>	might make sense, yes, or friday morning, where we need a planning session anyway
    May 29 17:24:56 <hpk>	thursday evening not everybody will be there 
    May 29 17:25:12 <stakkars>	but enough to get 80% off the kist
    May 29 17:25:15 <stakkars>	list
    May 29 17:25:21 <hpk>	mwh: how much are EP deadlines interfering with our sprint timing? 
    May 29 17:25:41 <mwh>	well, the submission deadline for talks is the 31st
    May 29 17:25:52 <stakkars>	*gulp*
    May 29 17:26:05 <hpk>	mwh: sure but i mean the sprint itself 
    May 29 17:26:10 <mwh>	so it would be nice to get a preliminary timetable up by the 4th or so
    May 29 17:26:16 <hpk>	mwh: but we indeed need to submit our talks that we discussed about last time 
    May 29 17:26:22 <mwh>	we need to get some pypy talk submissions in
    May 29 17:26:24 <mwh>	yes, indeed
    May 29 17:26:33 <mwh>	before the sprint...
    May 29 17:26:45 <mwh>	i put a small summary of the ideas into extradoc
    May 29 17:26:56 <hpk>	mwh: shall we co-ordinate tomorrow on #pypy regarding the talk submissions and see how we get them done? 
    May 29 17:26:58 <mwh>	we need to decide who gives what talk
    May 29 17:27:01 <mwh>	hpk: ok
    May 29 17:27:10 <hpk>	mwh: yes
    May 29 17:27:18 <mwh>	tomorrow then
    May 29 17:27:39 <hpk>	ok, last topic
    May 29 17:27:43 <mwh>	hpk: can you explain your pre-ep sprint mail then, you seem to have confused armin and me at least :)
    May 29 17:27:57 <stakkars>	me 2
    May 29 17:28:08 <hpk>	mwh: you answered "you had similar thoughts", didn't you? 
    May 29 17:28:41 <mwh>	well, yes, but i'm not sure what you were in fact proposing
    May 29 17:28:44 <hpk>	let's simply ask: who would come to a four-day pre-EP sprint and promise to 90% focus on pypy core and not on anything EP related? 
    May 29 17:29:03 <mwh>	i think i want to be in geneva well before the conference
    May 29 17:29:13 <mwh>	i don't think i could reasonably sprint in leysin say
    May 29 17:29:20 <hpk>	i know that Carl can't either 
    May 29 17:29:29 <mwh>	this doesn't apply to everyone else so much necessarily!
    May 29 17:29:46 <hpk>	and i personally doubt that anyone would have the focus we had last time in leysin (where we convened for almost 7 days, without many distractions!)
    May 29 17:29:51 <stakkars>	speaking for myself, Leysin would be preferable
    May 29 17:30:34 <aleale>	I dont have anything to do concerning EP
    May 29 17:30:44 <hpk>	anyway, let's close the official meeting (apart from christian's point) and decide in Duesseldorf about pre-EP

    May 29 17:30:52 <nikh>	for what it's worth, i could come to a pre-EP sprint (but not the post-EP one). i'd prefer geneva.
    May 29 17:31:12 *	hpk is not out to block it, just trying to realistically make a guess about how effective it would be
    May 29 17:31:14 <stakkars>	I think to come to whatsoever
    May 29 17:31:31 <stakkars>	shortly to my point?
    May 29 17:31:47 <hpk>	sure
    May 29 17:32:17 <stakkars>	1. Gerald has resigned from tismerysoft, backward by the end of March.
    May 29 17:32:44 <stakkars>	2. Eric is leaving the company on his own behalf by end of June.
    May 29 17:33:12 <stakkars>	3. I'm trying to get Richard back into more PyPy work by motivating EWT. This is in progress.
    May 29 17:33:14 <stakkars>	EOF
    May 29 17:33:24 <arre>	Pre- and/or post- is not problem for me.
    May 29 17:33:43 <hpk>	the post-EP one is not in question 
    May 29 17:34:23 <stakkars>	side note: EWT people are coming to EP, and might consider to join a sprint if they are welcome.
    May 29 17:34:30 <hpk>	stakkars: i see, thanks for letting us know 
    May 29 17:34:49 *	stakkars is actually sad about 1/2 but well
    May 29 17:35:09 <hpk>	i imagine 
    May 29 17:36:20 <hpk>	nikh: good to know, that you'd come to pre-ep :) 
    May 29 17:36:24 <mwh>	any other business?
    May 29 17:36:25 <arigo>	can we decide now that the post-EP sprint from 6th to 9th in Geneva will occur?
    May 29 17:36:56 <hpk>	sure, it think it's clear that we do a post-ep, question is how long 
    May 29 17:37:00 <arigo>	the situation seems confused enough that I think we should clarify this now, if possible
    May 29 17:37:15 <arigo>	6th-9th are the official dates, I don't think it can easily be longer
    May 29 17:37:30 <stakkars>	I think so, yes
    May 29 17:37:30 <mwh>	arigo: sounds good to me
    May 29 17:37:33 <hpk>	ok, then let's go for that 
    May 29 17:37:46 <hpk>	9th including (to not loose another of those few days)
    May 29 17:37:53 <arigo>	yes
    May 29 17:38:07 <hpk>	so people should usually stay until 10th, unless they only have a short trip
    May 29 17:38:41 <mwh>	makes sense
    May 29 17:38:46 <hpk>	ok, this is set, then if nobody objects (/me notes that he is not sure about his full post-EP attendance yet)
    May 29 17:39:07 <stakkars>	not sure about what?
    May 29 17:39:16 <hpk>	not sure about coming the full post-ep time myself 
    May 29 17:39:16 <stakkars>	ah, your attendance
    May 29 17:39:19 <hpk>	right
    May 29 17:39:43 *	hpk redundantly sidenotes that he'd like to get to some project planning regarding the rest of the year, including sprints
    May 29 17:39:47 <stakkars>	my auto-detypo-filter made me read "this" :-)
    May 29 17:40:15 <mwh>	hpk: i guess ddorf is a good place for that
    May 29 17:41:15 <hpk>	yip
    May 29 17:41:37 <hpk>	(the meeting is closed, in case nobody noticed yet :)
    May 29 17:42:01 <stakkars>	bye
    May 29 17:42:05 <nikh>	ok, bye then ;)
    May 29 17:42:11 <arigo>	bye!
    May 29 17:42:14 <hpk>	bye 
    May 29 17:42:17 <aleale>	bye
