=============================================
pypy-sync developer meeting 03th November
=============================================

Time & location: 1pm (30 minutes), GMT+1 at #pypy-sync

Attendees::

         Samuele Pedroni
         Armin Rigo
         Holger Krekel 
         Eric van Riet Paap
         Michael Hudson
         Carl Friedrich Bolz (moderation & minutes)
         Anders Lehmann
         Anders Chrigstrom


Regular Topics 
====================

- activity reports (3 prepared lines of info).
  All Attendees submitted activity reports (see `IRC-Log`_
  at the end and 'LAST/NEXT/BLOCKERS' entries in particular)

- resolve conflicts/blockers: No blockers

Topics of the week
===================

gothenburg sprint topics
--------------------------

We discussed the question how much room reports should have in the Gothenburg
sprint. The general agreement was that seven days of report writing is too
much.  The plan is to have two days of concentrated reportwriting that is
mostly for people involved with the EU part of the project. Afterwards there
will be five days of regular sprinting open to anybody interested. The topic of
these days will be "general phase 2" work, Armin will flesh that out a bit.  If
the sprint draws closer we can still decide which topics to stress harder.

finalizing the release
--------------------------

The release seems to be ready. We distributed small tasks, like who sends the
announcement to which mailing list.


.. _`IRC-Log`:

Complete IRC log
=================

complete log::

    **** BEGIN LOGGING AT Thu Nov  3 12:01:17 2005

    Nov 03 12:01:17 *	Now talking on #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 12:48:30 *	hpk (n=hpk@adsl-129-240-192-81.adsl2.iam.net.ma) has joined #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 12:49:08 *	pedronis (n=Samuele_@c-3c8b70d5.022-54-67626719.cust.bredbandsbolaget.se) has joined #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 12:53:46 *	aleale (n=andersle@clogs.dfki.uni-sb.de) has joined #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 13:00:22 cfbolz	it is one on my clock, shall we start?
    Nov 03 13:00:28 hpk	fine with me 
    Nov 03 13:01:09 mwh	yup
    Nov 03 13:01:34 ericvrp	go for it
    Nov 03 13:02:06 cfbolz	pedronis, arre, aleale : you there as well?
    Nov 03 13:02:21 pedronis	yes
    Nov 03 13:02:39 cfbolz	ok, then please everybody post their activity reports
    Nov 03 13:03:01 mwh	last: import analysis, release
    Nov 03 13:03:01 mwh	next: more refactoring stuff, some ppc32 stuff, ???
    Nov 03 13:03:01 mwh	blockers: -
    Nov 03 13:03:19 hpk	LAST: pypy-dissemination/pycon proposals, slight bit release participation NEXT: some sysadmin tasks BLOCKERS: travel, other activties
    Nov 03 13:03:31 cfbolz	LAST: reviewing docs, testing, pypy unrelated
    Nov 03 13:03:31 cfbolz	NEXT: reports
    Nov 03 13:03:31 cfbolz	BLOCKERS: -
    Nov 03 13:03:42 pedronis	LAST: release
    Nov 03 13:03:44 pedronis	NEXT: reports, vacation (away next Thurs->Wed)
    Nov 03 13:03:46 pedronis	BLOCKERS: -
    Nov 03 13:03:49 ericvrp	Last: fixes for release 0.8 and improving genjs unittesting
    Nov 03 13:03:49 ericvrp	Next: finish browser-based genjs unittesting
    Nov 03 13:03:49 ericvrp	Blockers: -
    Nov 03 13:04:33 cfbolz	hum, nobody else seems to participate. and since there are no blockers we can remove, let's move on
    Nov 03 13:04:44 arre	PREV: Moving
    Nov 03 13:05:03 arre	NEXT: Reviewing reports?
    Nov 03 13:05:37 arre	Blockers: No report to review yet.
    Nov 03 13:05:53 cfbolz	thanks
    Nov 03 13:05:58 cfbolz	gothenburg sprint topics
    Nov 03 13:05:58 cfbolz	-------------------------- 
    Nov 03 13:06:23 *	pedronis has quit (Read error: 104 (Connection reset by peer))
    Nov 03 13:06:28 cfbolz	maybe the first question is whether it is an open or more closed sprint
    Nov 03 13:06:51 *	arigo (n=arigo@c-3c8b70d5.022-54-67626719.cust.bredbandsbolaget.se) has joined #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 13:06:56 cfbolz	hi armin!
    Nov 03 13:07:00 hpk	we could also consider making two days of reports and the rest coding or so 
    Nov 03 13:07:01 arigo	hi
    Nov 03 13:07:04 *	pedronis (n=Samuele_@c-3c8b70d5.022-54-67626719.cust.bredbandsbolaget.se) has joined #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 13:07:34 mwh	i was kinda assuming that this would be a more closed, report oriented sprint
    Nov 03 13:07:35 hpk	splitting report from coding for the sprint might make it easier for new/not EU-involved people to attend 
    Nov 03 13:07:41 mwh	but i don't know why :)
    Nov 03 13:07:51 hpk	mwh: no it's true but the question is to which degree 
    Nov 03 13:08:11 hpk	i mean do we intend 7 days of report writing with like 7-9 people? 
    Nov 03 13:09:05 mwh	that sounds like a lot
    Nov 03 13:09:09 cfbolz	the alternative being 2 days of reports and 5 days real sprinting?
    Nov 03 13:09:22 *	hpk notes that his participation is anyway uncertain, at the moment, because of the EU bruxelles workshop and going to brazil 
    Nov 03 13:09:25 aleale	no hopefully not. two days must be enough
    Nov 03 13:10:04 cfbolz	does the idea of splitting the sprint make sense to everybody?
    Nov 03 13:10:06 hpk	i'd rather have 2 days of full focused report work than 7 days of some-do-reports-and-the-others-do-whatever-to-avoid-it
    Nov 03 13:10:15 mwh	makes sense
    Nov 03 13:10:19 cfbolz	hpk: yes, that makes sense
    Nov 03 13:10:46 hpk	and anyway: the rough reports should be written by then, no? 
    Nov 03 13:11:00 cfbolz	indeed
    Nov 03 13:11:05 mwh	"should be", yes
    Nov 03 13:11:10 cfbolz	pedronis, arigo: any opinions?
    Nov 03 13:11:11 pedronis	yes, most reports are in-progress now apart one or two
    Nov 03 13:11:37 arigo	I thought dec 1st was the hard deadline for reports?
    Nov 03 13:11:53 pedronis	also possibly true
    Nov 03 13:11:55 hpk	yip, but the sprint was still supposed to finalize them 
    Nov 03 13:12:05 hpk	ASFAIR 
    Nov 03 13:12:32 pedronis	yes, I also thinking that dragging the reports too much is not good vs phase 2 work
    Nov 03 13:13:06 cfbolz	sure. but does this mean we won't do any reports on the sprint?
    Nov 03 13:14:03 pedronis	well, we may do some consistency review, final touches
    Nov 03 13:14:20 cfbolz	so two days sounds right, or we just say we do it in between?
    Nov 03 13:14:46 pedronis	mixing coding and reporting doesn't work
    Nov 03 13:14:54 pedronis	at least that was my impression in Paris
    Nov 03 13:15:20 mwh	two days at the start sounds good to me
    Nov 03 13:15:39 hpk	to me too, might just influence the break-day timing 
    Nov 03 13:15:44 mwh	if we turn out to to have anything to do, all the better
    Nov 03 13:15:50 hpk	like it would not make sense for coding-people to arrive and have a breakday after one day 
    Nov 03 13:15:55 hpk	mwh: i agree
    Nov 03 13:16:12 cfbolz	fine with everyone?
    Nov 03 13:16:46 mwh	aye
    Nov 03 13:16:47 aleale	yes
    Nov 03 13:17:00 hpk	there are two remaining issues with the sprint, though: who heads the announcement/coordinates and what are the sprint coding topics? 
    Nov 03 13:17:20 cfbolz	yes, sure. I just wanted to settle this issue first
    Nov 03 13:17:35 cfbolz	and I think bea wanted to do announcement/coordinates
    Nov 03 13:18:16 hpk	but writing the "main topics" needs to be done by one of us 
    Nov 03 13:18:24 cfbolz	yes
    Nov 03 13:18:29 mwh	when does that need to be done?
    Nov 03 13:18:34 mwh	not yet, i'd have thought
    Nov 03 13:18:39 cfbolz	as fast as possible
    Nov 03 13:18:44 hpk	so: l3-interpreter, stackless, threading, optimizations, phase 2 in general? 
    Nov 03 13:18:46 mwh	though obviously we could start thinking about it
    Nov 03 13:18:52 cfbolz	to send out the announcement
    Nov 03 13:19:11 cfbolz	hpk: sounds right
    Nov 03 13:19:51 hpk	i think we could make it easy and list possible topics from  WP06/WP07 and maybe WP03 (socket would be nice) topics 
    Nov 03 13:20:08 hpk	and refine later (after the announcement) what exactly we are tackling 
    Nov 03 13:20:08 cfbolz	ok
    Nov 03 13:20:22 cfbolz	any volunteers for doing that?
    Nov 03 13:20:31 cfbolz	(listing topics for the announcement)
    Nov 03 13:20:46 hpk	arigo: feel like a bit of holiday occupation? :) 
    Nov 03 13:21:23 arigo	ok
    Nov 03 13:21:51 cfbolz	so is everybody fine with that?
    Nov 03 13:22:10 hpk	me->yes, obviously 
    Nov 03 13:22:18 cfbolz	me as well
    Nov 03 13:22:42 mwh	aye
    Nov 03 13:22:52 arre	aye
    Nov 03 13:22:53 pedronis	yes
    Nov 03 13:22:57 ericvrp	aye, yes sir
    Nov 03 13:23:02 cfbolz	:-)
    Nov 03 13:23:21 cfbolz	next topic, then?
    Nov 03 13:23:42 hpk	sure
    Nov 03 13:23:43 cfbolz	finalizing the release
    Nov 03 13:23:43 cfbolz	--------------------------
    Nov 03 13:24:04 pedronis	first thanks to all people that helped with the release
    Nov 03 13:24:09 mwh	we're really very nearly done aren't we?
    Nov 03 13:24:15 cfbolz	pedronis: and thanks to you
    Nov 03 13:24:25 pedronis	basically I need to flip the doc bits from branch back to the trunk
    Nov 03 13:24:40 pedronis	and we need people to send out the annoucement to the various lists
    Nov 03 13:24:57 cfbolz	who wants to send which announcements?
    Nov 03 13:25:02 cfbolz	ericvrp: would you do llvm-dev?
    Nov 03 13:25:11 ericvrp	'kay
    Nov 03 13:25:22 cfbolz	I can do comp.lang.python, since I read it anyway
    Nov 03 13:25:23 pedronis	mwh: python-dev?
    Nov 03 13:25:38 cfbolz	(if nobody else wants to, that is)
    Nov 03 13:25:46 mwh	pedronis: sure
    Nov 03 13:25:55 ericvrp	I would like to suggest no announcement to comp.lang.javascript, yet.
    Nov 03 13:26:03 hpk	pedronis: pypy-dev then? 
    Nov 03 13:26:10 mwh	cfbolz: you'll do python-announce too?
    Nov 03 13:26:10 cfbolz	ericvrp: sure :-)
    Nov 03 13:26:12 pedronis	I will send to pypy-dev, yes
    Nov 03 13:26:12 hpk	ericvrp: ok, can you do no announcement to c.l.js then? 
    Nov 03 13:26:20 cfbolz	mwh: ok
    Nov 03 13:26:27 hpk	i could send to c.l.announce 
    Nov 03 13:26:28 pedronis	and pypy-funding
    Nov 03 13:26:32 ericvrp	hpk: I will try
    Nov 03 13:26:36 cfbolz	hpk: fine with me
    Nov 03 13:26:37 hpk	ericvrp: i can help 
    Nov 03 13:26:51 ericvrp	:-)
    Nov 03 13:27:09 cfbolz	anything we forgot?
    Nov 03 13:27:28 mwh	well, i can make a blog entry i guess :)
    Nov 03 13:27:34 cfbolz	good!
    Nov 03 13:27:48 pedronis	going to flip bits to trunk
    Nov 03 13:28:00 cfbolz	I guess that's it then. anything else for the last two minutes?
    Nov 03 13:28:57 hpk	john cage
    Nov 03 13:29:02 cfbolz	haha
    Nov 03 13:29:10 cfbolz	good, let's close the meeting then, thanks for attending!
    Nov 03 13:29:19 aleale	that's too long
    Nov 03 13:29:39 mwh	wow, an early finish
    Nov 03 13:29:41 *	mwh (n=user@82-33-200-181.cable.ubr01.azte.blueyonder.co.uk) has left #pypy-sync ("ERC Version 5.0 (CVS) $Revision: 1.771 $ (IRC client for Emacs)")
    Nov 03 13:29:44 aleale	bye
    Nov 03 13:29:49 *	arre (i=ac@kourier.strakt.com) has left #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 13:29:59 *	aleale (n=andersle@clogs.dfki.uni-sb.de) has left #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 13:29:59 hpk	bye
    Nov 03 13:30:03 arigo	bye
    Nov 03 13:30:04 *	arigo (n=arigo@c-3c8b70d5.022-54-67626719.cust.bredbandsbolaget.se) has left #pypy-sync
    Nov 03 13:30:28 ericvrp	bye
    Nov 03 13:30:31 cfbolz	bye all
    Nov 03 13:30:36 hpk	ups, arigo from '.se', so he isn't actually in switzerland as i though 
    Nov 03 13:30:36 *	ericvrp (n=ericvrp@ericvrp.demon.nl) has left #pypy-sync
    **** ENDING LOGGING AT Thu Nov  3 13:30:36 2005

