=============================================
pypy-sync developer meeting 8th September 
=============================================

Time & location: 1pm (30 minutes) at #pypy-sync 

Attendees::

         Holger Krekel,
         Christian Tismer, 
         Anders Lehmann,
         Adrien Di Mascio,
         Samuele Pedroni,
         Anders Chrigstroem,
         Ludovic Aubrien,
         Armin Rigo (minutes/moderation),
         Carl Friedrich Bolz,
         Eric van Riet Paap,
         Michael Hudson (lurking)

Regular Topics 
====================

- activity reports (3 prepared lines of info). 
  All Attendees submitted activity reports (see `IRC-Log`_ 
  at the end and 'LAST/NEXT/BLOCKERS' entries in particular)

- resolve conflicts/blockers
  No conflicts were discovered.

Topics of the week
===================

Documentation and reports: status, assignment
----------------------------------------------

Samuele and Armin drafted some content for the EU reports (related
to WP5) in eu-tracking/deliverable/D05-reports-planning.txt.

Holger and Carl want to help with these reports, but not before,
respectively, the 3rd part of the month, and October.  Holger also
suggested that the four of us could meet in Paris one day before the
sprint starts.

We'll coordinate a bit on #pypy.

Setting up another PyPy server
-------------------------------

We will soon have a Linux PC to be used as a general computation
server for PyPy (snake.cs.uni-duesseldorf.de).  Armin will set it up,
also to do things like automated testing and PyPy translation. Holger
proposed some help.  We will probably copy all codespeak accounts to
snake.  The machine is a 2x 3.2GHz, 1GB RAM (soon 2GB), and it
compiles C/C++ or -- more interestingly -- translates PyPy extremely
fast.

Meeting time
------------------

A number of people are not too happy about the time (1pm) of the
pypy-sync meetings, but discussions for a different time show more
problems than solutions.  Next meeting is still at 1pm.


Closing 
------------------

Armin closes the meeting in time at 1:30pm.

.. _`IRC-log`: 

Here is the full IRC log:: 

    Session Start (pypy:#pypy-sync): Thu Sep 08 12:59:52 2005
    [12:59] *** #pypy-sync was created on Thu Sep 08 12:39:51 2005.
    [13:02] *** ludal has joined #pypy-sync.
    [13:05] hpk: hum, i guess armin is busy with some HHU admin or so 
    [13:06] hpk: shall we just start anyway?
    [13:06] stakkars: so let's play the PyPy rock, until we start.  (proposals for the melody?)
    [13:06] aleale: I guess
    [13:06] adim: +1 for me
    [13:07] stakkars: DONE: boehm under Windows, lots of benchmarks, rewrote rlist and listobject
    [13:07] stakkars: BLOCK: rtyper behavior which didn't match the implementation
    [13:07] stakkars: NEXT: maybe a single dict implementation, removing it from interp-level, report templates, open for other tasks
    [13:07] aleale: prev: trying to clean up translate_pypy
    [13:07] aleale: next: first draft of plan for WP9, more translate_pypy
    [13:07] aleale: blockers: -
    [13:07] pedronis: LAST: planning report with Armin, compiler with Logilan and Arre, annotator err reporting, a bit of translate_pypy, more convenience commands in its debugger
    [13:07] hpk: last: EU issues, website/codespeak stuff, mentoring
    [13:07] hpk: next: non-pypy stuff, codespeak migration second go
    [13:07] hpk: blockers: -
    [13:07] pedronis: NEXT: reports, more of the rest
    [13:07] pedronis: BLOCKERS: -
    [13:08] adim: LAST: astcompiler
    [13:08] adim: NEXT: astcompiler
    [13:08] adim: BLOCKERS: none
    [13:08] arre:     LAST: Vacation and working on astcompiler with Samuele.
    [13:08] arre:     NEXT: More work in astcompiler.
    [13:08] arre: BLOCKERS: No known.
    [13:08] ludal: this week: some pairing with Adrien, also played a bit with compile options
    [13:08] ludal: next week: same
    [13:08] ludal: blockers: none
    [13:08] *** arigo has joined #pypy-sync.
    [13:08] arigo: oups, failed to speed up my eating
    [13:08] arigo: sorry
    [13:08] cfbolz: LAST: inlining functions
    [13:08] cfbolz: NEXT: pypy unrelated
    [13:08] cfbolz: BLOCKERS: None
    [13:08] *** cfbolz has left #pypy-sync.
    [13:08] ericvrp: last: talk with llvm team about their escape analysis
    [13:08] ericvrp: next: prepare usage of heap2stack
    [13:08] *** cfbolz has joined #pypy-sync.
    [13:08] ericvrp: blockers: am a bit unfocused at the moment
    [13:08] hpk: arigo: we are in activity reports, still lots to go :-)
    [13:09] stakkars: should we paste it all again forArmin? It's quick
    [13:09] hpk: i send him the log later
    [13:09] arigo: yes
    [13:09] ludal: we could also consider moving next meetings out of lunchtime
    [13:10] arigo: LAST: drafted EU reports, not much else (minor illness)
    [13:10] arigo: NEXT: EU reports
    [13:10] arigo: BLOCKERS: -
    [13:10] cfbolz: -1
    [13:10] arigo: any status lines missing?
    [13:10] hpk: don't think so
    [13:10] arigo: any blockers/conflicts ?
    [13:11] hpk: apparently not :-)
    [13:11] arigo: ok :-)
    [13:11] stakkars: I only saw a little unfocusedness and my problems which are solved.
    [13:11] arigo: ok
    [13:11] arigo: we'll talk about the time later, I should manage to eat a bit earlier
    [13:11] arigo: let's move to topics of the week
    [13:12] arigo: Documentation and reports: status, assignments
    [13:12] arigo: pedronis: do you want to give a quick summary?
    [13:12] ludal: well, It's not about you, I'm personnally fed up with eating sandwiches every thursday
    [13:13] arigo: ludal: ok, let's move it as topic 3 then
    [13:13] pedronis: we drafted the some outline of the contents
    [13:13] *** mwh has joined #pypy-sync.
    [13:14] pedronis: it's in D05-reports-planning.txt
    [13:14] pedronis: in eu-tracking/deliverables
    [13:14] arigo: the question at the moment is if this is going to be written by Samuele and me only, or not
    [13:14] arigo: the D05.1 "report about translating a very-high-level description
    [13:14] arigo:   of a language into low level code by building on "abstract interpretation" and
    [13:14] arigo:   PyPy's separation of the interpreter and the object space in particular") is probably going to be
    [13:15] hpk: i am willing to help but probably only in the last third of the month
    [13:15] hpk: (can't say which parts at the moment)
    [13:15] cfbolz: me as well from beginning of october
    [13:16] hpk: pedronis, cfbolz, arigo: what about meeting one day earlier in paris and trying to work on that together?
    [13:16] cfbolz: fine with me!
    [13:16] arigo: and always open, the question of what kind of format we should aim for
    [13:16] hpk: first please ReST 
    [13:16] arigo: I mean contentwise
    [13:16] hpk: otherwise it's a pain to collaborate
    [13:16] hpk: ah ok, sorry
    [13:17] pedronis: arigo: there was some info about that
    [13:17] pedronis: in the minutes
    [13:17] pedronis: of the management meeting
    [13:17] * hpk hopes to get examples of reports next week
    [13:17] pedronis: in Heildeberg
    [13:17] arigo: ah ok
    [13:18] hpk: idea: we should generally try to think of stuff we could link from Wikipedia to the pypy pages
    [13:19] hpk: wikipedia really has nice terms and there are other projects like Scheme interweaved and mentioned a lot
    [13:19] hpk: (this is regarindg the "publish" part of the deliverable)
    [13:19] stakkars: and btw., WIkipedia already has an idea about Stackless, but PyPy is missing...
    [13:20] arigo: ok (I can't drive this any more right now, as I didn't see the minutes in question)
    [13:21] arigo: next topic is: I'm setting up a server here at HHU
    [13:21] hpk: arigo, pedronis, cfbolz, hpk: we should try to remain in contact/discussion about this
    [13:21] cfbolz: hpk: indeed
    [13:21] arigo: (yes, I'll try to catch up and let's continue this on #pypy)
    [13:21] arigo: the HHU server should be open to any of us
    [13:22] hpk: that's good, there actually is an easy way to setup all pypy/codspeak users up on that machine
    [13:22] arigo: as I said on #pypy it's a good but normal PC, 2x3.2GHz, 1GB RAM (soon 2GB)
    [13:22] arigo: it compiles very quickly so we could use it for background testing/translating
    [13:22] stakkars: dual processor, great
    [13:22] hpk: sounds good.
    [13:23] hpk: i have some scripts to regularly run tests. maybe we can hack a bit on this together some time soon.
    [13:23] arigo: hpk: yes
    [13:23] arigo: also, what is the status of the automated translation-runner, doing a binary search?
    [13:23] hpk: nothin, only a design draft was done in Goetheborg (from Anders Q. IIRC)
    [13:24] arigo: I thought there was some code
    [13:24] hpk: code in the sense of classes and methods but all unimplemented
    [13:24] arigo: ah ok
    [13:25] arigo: fine, I guess that's it for this meeting -- next meeting:
    [13:25] arigo: change the time?  what about 1:30?
    [13:26] * hpk would prefer earlier but is fine with 01:30 
    [13:26] arigo: it could be anything actually, e.g. 1:20-1:50
    [13:26] cfbolz: 1:30 is ok but not later
    [13:26] arigo: or of course 1:12-1:42
    [13:26] aleale: ok by me - would prefer 11.30
    [13:26] hpk: ludal: what is your opinion?
    [13:26] ludal: is there a particular reason to be between 12h-14h
    [13:26] stakkars: bad for me,I'dprefer earlier as well
    [13:26] ludal: 11h30 or 13h30 is fine
    [13:26] ericvrp: I would prefer earlier then 13:00
    [13:27] hpk: ok, so what about 11:30 ? 
    [13:27] ericvrp: +
    [13:27] ludal: i'm just wondering maybe someone has obligations outside
    [13:27] cfbolz: earlier is bad for me --> lectures
    [13:27] ludal: hpk: +1
    [13:27] arigo: 12:00 ?
    [13:27] cfbolz: they end at 13.00 :-(
    [13:27] pedronis: 11:30 -1
    [13:28] ludal: no up yet ;)
    [13:28] ludal: s/no/not/
    [13:28] arigo: hum, difficult
    [13:28] hpk: well, let's all send arigo times we prefer per mail and he can figure it out and invite accordingly :-)
    [13:28] arre: 11:00 would be even better for me.
    [13:29] ludal: ok so constraints are ericvrp < 13:00; cfbolz >= 13:00 ...
    [13:29] hpk: ludal: or you use your constraint solver or whatever :-) 
    [13:29] aleale: we could leave to the moderator of the week to decide
    [13:29] ludal: I don't think it can manage that :)
    [13:29] aleale: s/leave/leave it
    [13:29] arigo: Christian, you are next week
    [13:29] hpk: i don't think changing the time each week is a great idea
    [13:29] arigo: (at least you proposed yourself as such, last time)
    [13:30] adim: hpk: +1
    [13:30] ericvrp: if we go for 13:30, I will leave at 13:55
    [13:30] arigo: I suggest that 1pm is still the proposed time (least conflicting)
    [13:30] aleale: arigo:+1
    [13:30] ericvrp: fine
    [13:30] stakkars: so Ido the meeting at 1pmnext week.
    [13:30] arigo: but we could all send constrains to Christian (precise constrains, e.g. <= 13:25 is fine)
    [13:30] hpk: arigo: +1 ( until next week where we can resolve this maybe)
    [13:30] stakkars: and I'll bring some more spaces
    [13:30] arigo: ok
    [13:31] arigo: fine, let's keep 1pm for next Thursday as well
    [13:31] arigo: stakkars:  :-)
    [13:31] arigo: thanks all :-)
    [13:31] cfbolz: see you
    [13:31] ludal: bye
    [13:31] adim: see ou
    [13:31] *** cfbolz has left #pypy-sync.
    [13:31] aleale: see you
    [13:31] hpk: bye
    [13:31] *** adim has left #pypy-sync.
    [13:31] *** hpk has left #pypy-sync.
    [13:31] stakkars: I wished I could send my notebook in for repair, but then I don't have any
    [13:31] *** ludal has left #pypy-sync.
    [13:32] *** aleale has left #pypy-sync.
    [13:32] arigo: stakkars: do you have a log?
    [13:32] stakkars: yes
    [13:32] arigo: thanks
    Session Close (#pypy-sync): Thu Sep 08 13:32:32 2005
